# Adjacency and Refraction

The problem with interdisciplinarity is that it starts, _a priori_, with disciplines. It serves neither to establish new disciplines (by nature of its inter-ness), nor to shatter the foundations of an old one. It is always constituted by some form of mixing of otherwise already established fields; a confrontation or an attempt at resolution, the building of bridges, or worse yet, the establishment of overarching conceptual frameworks meant to unify the otherwise disparate (Klein 27-8).

Here, I do not want to build bridges. I dont want to live comfortably in multiple houses, or to build some new hybrid home out of pieces chipped away from the corners of existing institutions. To be honest, I have never felt entirely at home in the first place.

Instead, what about a kind of vagrancy? A wandering through and in between the scopes of disciplines, positioning them neither antagonistically nor in unison, but simply alongside one another in their singularity (Cecchetto 1). Or treating them refractively, as lenses, by looking through one onto the field of the other. Seeing, for example, cinema through the kaleidoscope of sonic discourse. Or treating them spatially but not topographically, “rat-drifting” through the margins and back alleys of one discipline, forming creative by-products from a preoccupation with the activities of another (Arnold). My intention is not to unify or to bridge these disciplines in my life—computation, music, and cinema—but to place them adjacent to one another and to navigate their intersections, dead-ends, and distances as such, rather that to impose a particular schematic on the journey. This is akin, perhaps, to McKenzie Wark’s method of antipodality, "which begins from the experience of being neither here nor there. It's about drifting along a moving and variable line, and of thinking and writing from within that experience” (10).

To draw a cinematic analogy, adjacency is not montage, where proximity is primarily discursive. I intend neither montage’s suturing, the “stitching together [of] disjunctive shots into a seemingly continuous narrative” (Mitchell 401), nor Eisenstein’s juxtapositional “collision” of opposites (133).

_Greenwich Park_ (2014), which is one of my few recent videos to feature a soundtrack, exhibits this adjacency somewhat differently. The video consists of two long takes of a field in London’s Greenwich Park. With the camera pointing roughly north, the first shot is of a large tree; the second shows the view in the other direction (i.e. facing south). In both shots, the quotidian activity of the park is visible—dog walkers, bicyclists, children playing, and so on. The soundtrack captures the ambient sounds of the park and the wind blowing across the microphone. After the fact, this sound was fed into an algorithm that triggers ukulele and drum sounds in correspondence to the intensity of the wind, a digital aeolian harp of sorts. This algorithmic intervention is asymmetrical; the video footage is unprocessed and unedited, while the audio is treated and (at least stochastically) composed.
Sound and image in Greenwich Park are related causally but not dialogically, reflecting a coincidental, concurrent interaction between them, between nature (the wind in the park rippling the tree leaves and the grass) and technology (the recording apparatus and my algorithmic aeolian harp).

To be clear, the goal of this theoretical tool of adjacency is not to argue that the various facets of my practice remain wholly fractured or unrelated (they are unified somehow as my practices), but to avoid the imposition of a single theoretical or thematic narrative that risks masking the particularity of these practices. This text, then, concerns itself less with unification or elucidation than with exploring a collection of loosely-coupled themes and activities, placing them alongside each other, available to be woven and unravelled, modulated and transformed, or refracted and bent by their proximity.
