# Lenses and Modulators (Cinema is an Energy Machine!)

An optical lens is a tool for focussing, bending, magnifying, or distorting light by means of refraction. The nature and extent of this refraction is always influenced by the characteristics of the lens itself, its material and curvature. Lenses are never a fully transparent instrument, always lending their own particular qualities to the images they mediate. More broadly, we can imagine a verb: to lens. The process of lensing, then, can be understood as a form of technologically mediated transformation between different states or ways of seeing. Lenses are, as both a literal and a metaphorical force, crucial to my practice; this section explores several instances of such metaphorical lenses and their role within my work and that of others such as Stan Brakhage, Jonas Mekas, and Chris Welsby.

## The Eye Lens

In Metaphors on Vision, filmmaker Stan Brakhage describes a series of perceptual "exercises" in visionary seeing, or transformational states. They trace perceptual states that both Brakhage and his viewers can deploy while watching and making; a set of perceptual filters or lenses through which cinema and the world at large can be creatively bent and refracted. He describes these perceptual states obliquely:

"Within this aura of non-shape, shapes reshape, and as long as the eye breathes them naturally, sponse and response equally unconscious, they continue their transformatory dance until one is involved purely with the innards of what one once knew only as outline... Willful attention, forced beyond the natural capacity for mental absorption, produces a willy-nilliness less memory-dominated... here one seems more practitioner than patient" (Brakhage 34).

As texts, Brakhage’s phenomenological accounts of his hypnagogic and hypnotic experiences are, in some sense, hopeless. Such transformations of fundamentally visual-imaginative experiences lensed into the “word-world” unavoidably take on the "sense-killing finality" of language and description that Brakhage was so ideologically averse to (29). His descriptions of these experiences are not representations; they do not bind to some kind of exterior truth that, though subject to inevitable loss in translation, can be lifted from the medium of the eye/mind into language. At best, they are ghosts, dead, only specimens for study (36). Yet still they provide glimpses of other modes of seeing available to us, beyond or in between the parallel lines of linear perspective, enlightenment rationality, and industrial technique. The subjective eye is a lens on the world.

In other words, Brakhage's psychedelic visions points us toward the potential for creative modes of seeing where, as spectator or artist, we can actively transform a work of art through our perceptual experience with it. This transformational vision is a practice that must be cultivated and explored over time and with attention (or an assiduous lack of it). Yet at the same time, it is not something that is achieved or controlled, but given, "bequeathed... at every illumination" (26). It is a receptivity, an opening up in equal measure to energies from within and without, a coupling of the imagination, the mind’s eye, and the diversity of visual phenomena discoverable in external reality (realities?).

## The Hand Lens

"One may hand hold the camera and inherit worlds of space" (Brakhage 16).

In several of my recent videos, you can see traces of me holding or manipulating the camera by hand. The frame shakes, subtly or overtly. Two recent videos, _Everything is Awake!_ (2014) and _How Long Will We Live?_ (2015) shake in a way that is particularly unapologetic. There are several ways to read this (none of which are surely right). First, as the mark of the amateur: awkward, casual, and unskilled. The codes of Hollywood are so deeply ingrained in viewers that the hand is unavoidably read as a lack of competence. Yet Brakhage, while watching shaky amateur home movies, makes a distinctly unconventional connection:

"this slight trembling was the beating of the filmmaker's heart, the emotions of this beating heart. When, for example, filming his children… in French you also use the word amateur to name a person who loves something...  all films are 'home movies'" (quoted in Renaud).

For Brakhage, camera shake is a filmmaker's love made visible, a direct transmission relayed between body, lens, and eye. Once again, his is an expressionistic mode of seeing, but it is nonetheless one that is rooted in cinema's profound ability to transmit and modulate affect.

To me, the shaking camera is also a kind of energy, an overflow of vibration and movement. Cinema is a machine that transforms and transfers energies (Stiegler 10), and the viewer is the performer of these energies, her active gaze amplifying or attenuating cinema’s unfolding vibrations. "All are priests both giving and receiving" (Brakhage 15). In videos like my own _How Long Will We Live?_ (2015), the movement of the camera resonates with the vibrational energy within its frame; bees, flowers, wind, and family are all in motion, textures for the eye, energy generated from their friction. The two-dimensional "significant" surface (Flusser 8) of the screen becomes variegated with texture, increasingly insignificant. This is an active, haptic vision "occupied by intensities, wind and noise, forces and tactile qualities" (Deleuze and Guattari 479).

## The Technological Lens

_Note: this whole section needs to be reworked based on the conversations with Stan regarding strategies for seeing stably; indeed, the technological lens and all these lenses are a set of strategies or modes of seeing, rather than fixed "natural" vs. "technological" states._

Try an experiment for yourself: sit still and make a smooth pan across the room by turning your neck. It doesn’t work. The eye skips and jumps, refusing to be contained by the gesture. There is no natural pan, only jumps and stutters. Our very idea of cinematic vision is shaped by the steady, industrialized hand of Hollywood with its dollies and cranes and stabilizers, all of which are deployed in order to foreclose any disruption to the passive, frictionless, self-effacing flow of narrative.

Another little perceptual experiment: wobble your head in your best imitation of a shaky, handheld telephoto lens. Despite best efforts, this doesn't work either. The eye never shakes like a camera. Rather than representing the translation of emotional worlds into direct visual form, or the pre-linguistic natural state of the eye (as Brakhage might argue), the shaking of the camera is always distinctly technological. It is constituted by, and only arises within, the technology of optics. Eyes don’t tremble, except on the fringes of illness or psychedelic states. Camera shake is a leakage of the mechanism into the frame, a reminder that cinema is not really a window onto an unmediated, viscous reality. It is a confirmation that everything in cinema is constituted via the technics of the lens and the camera and the hand. You are looking, but always within the framework of looking that cameras engender. Flusser’s "program" of the camera: "every photograph is a realization of one of the possibilities contained within the program of the camera" (26).  Cinema is an interaction between our sight, the camera’s capacity for engendering sight, and the hand that made the video.
