# Methods

## Disciplines, Interdisciplinarity, and Adjacency

It is difficult to address the question of methods without also touching on the issue of disciplines and disciplinarity, and in the context of this particular work, of interdisciplinarity. My artwork and research practice here is engaged in, amongst, and alongside three ostensibly distinct disciplines: video art, music, and design<sup>1</sup>. Within these disciplines, my activities can be further segmented into the categories of digital cinema, computer music, and inclusive software architecture. Yet such categories sit slightly uncomfortably, and the question that invariably arises from a confession of multiple disciplinary affinities is: What, then, is the relationship between these disciplines in my artistic and scholar practice?

First, I want to be clear that I am concerned here with affording a certain degree of autonomy--a slight gap--between my design, music, and video practices. This, is not, of course, to argue that there are no significant connections between these activities, but rather to retain, as best as possible, the unique medial and conceptual qualities that inhere in each, while opening up the possibility for something new to emerge from their proximity. Music, for example, has a somewhat "spectral" presence within this particular project, since the end product consists only of a collection of videos, many of which are completely silent. Throughout the process of making (mostly) silent videos, however, I was consistently composing electronic music, improvising on the guitar, and designing and supporting open source music synthesis software. So if my musical activities are to be felt within these videos--or, for that matter, my technical/design activities within either side of my artistic practice--then I would like it not to be understood within a mode of "integrated practice," nor one that aims for a synthesis of media, disciplines, and methods, but rather one in which a small network or assemblage of parallel irritations and transformations move autonomously in and out of phase with one another. Indeed, it is this idea of systemic closure and transformation, rather than synthesis--which I call _disciplinary adjacency_--that serves as the "metamethod" upon which my iterative practice/research methods of lensing and open source community collaboration are based. The point of discplinary adjacency is not to argue for a separation of practice or a lack of relations, but to suggest that something interesting can occur as a result of maintaining the distinction--that discplinary relations are emergent within a particular practice, and that they thus have the ability to re-form and be actively reconfigured over time and in different contexts<sup>2</sup>.

### Modes of Interdisciplinarity

Disciplines carry with them a specific methodological culture, a set of practices that serve to define and protect the boundaries of the field as an object and system of practice. The problem with disciplines, for me, is partially one of positionality. I have never felt entirely at home in any of them. Though it is tempting (and not altogether inaccurate) to refer myself as an "interdisciplinary artist," or to argue that I am drawing together a collection research methods from each of the aforementioned disciplines in a manner that is consistent with "an interdisciplinary practice," several concerns emerge for me with such a construction. Despite its casual and prolific use throughout arts and design scholarship, the scope and definition of interdisciplinarity as a concrete set of methods or practices is impossibly vague. More importantly, the concept carries with it strong connotations of unification or blending that, for me, risk masking the particularities of my thinking and creative practices in each discipline.

In their book, _Interdisciplinarity: Reconfigurations of the Social and Natural Sciences_, Andrew Barry and Georgina Born have attempted, if not to specifically define interdisciplinarity, to at least identify several of its streams or _modes_, each of which highlight some methodological risks and potentials that I have attempted to either avoid, elaborate, or refigure in some way. First, Barry and Born identify the most common (or rather, the most discursively common and institutionally-sanctioned) mode of interdisciplinarity as "an integrative or synthesis model... in which a given interdisciplinary practice proceeds through integration of two or more 'antecedent' disciplines in relatively symmetric form" (10). Secondly, Barry and Born identify a "subordination-service mode," in which there is a hierarchical arrangement of labour where "one or more disciplines occupy a subordinate or service role to other component disciplines" (11). Lastly, an "agonistic-antagonistic mode" where interdisciplinarity operates as a "self-conscious dialogue with, criticism of, or opposition to the limits of established disciplines, or the status of academic research or instrumental knowledge production in general" (12). I will address these modes, and their relation to my own work, in order.

#### Synthesis and Systems

I am most worried, within the scope of this project, with the first mode of interdisciplinarity, synthesis. To synthesize, one must start from a set of distinct and recognizable disciplines, taking it as a given that they are compatible to be somehow merged or unified. Synthesis serves neither to bring into play new disciplines (by nature of its inter-ness), nor to substantially perturb the systems of existing ones. It is, then, always constituted by some form of _mixing_ of otherwise already established fields; an attempt at resolution, the building of bridges or, worse yet, the establishment of overarching conceptual frameworks meant to unify the otherwise disparate (Klein 27-8). The real problem with disciplinary synthesis, for me, is that it risks homogenization or generalization, erasing the particularities of a practice and suggesting certain aesthetic constructs that I specifically want to avoid. In particular, easy hybrids such as "visual music" fail to skip their familiar ontological grooves, to generate something new that is potentially more or other than "visual" or "music." These synthetic modes also assume, conceptually, a translational and informational model of practice, where messages from one discipline or practice (music into video, for example) can be transported across disciplinary boundaries as "packets of meaning" and remain fully intact. In second-order systems theory, systems are understood as "operationally closed to information from their environment" (Clarke and Hansen 9). Applying this to interdisciplinarity, the environment of a particular disciplinary system (e.g. video art) is formed by the other disciplines to which it is adjacent (e.g. music and software design). As a result, "the environment can perturb living, psychic, and social systems but cannot _operationally in-form_ them" (9).

This model of disciplines as systems that interact in complex but operationally closed ways highlights what I see as the potential of practicing in multiple disciplines simultaneously: that asymmetric or apparently disparate activities can generate new insights in strangely context-specific forms. It is precisely the fact that methodological messages are skewed and transformed across systemic boundaries that can produce the possibility of unanticipated, non-schematic interactions and non-linear influences arising from the "gap" between disciplines or practices and their failure to directly communicate. Put simply, work in one discipline somehow ends up bending or altering another project asynchronously<sup>3</sup>. Insofar as "cybernetic methodologies draw out the virtuality correlated with actuality" (Clarke and Hansen 3), my proposed approach here perhaps also echoes the transversality of Felix Guattari, in that it shifts the methodological emphasis from "neatly tying everything up in a unidimensional manner... of simply discerning patterns" and instead towards establishing new assemblages made consistent by "virtual lines of bifurcation and differentiation" and "ontological heterogeneity" (Genosko 36-7).

#### Subjugation and the Drift

Barry and Born's second mode, _subjugation/service_, is, I suspect, a more conventional approach to combining disciplines amongst specialist researchers who are firmly rooted in a particular discipline and who "feel they hold the master discourse." In this model, a discipline becomes the _subject_ of a more dominant discipline, sanctioning researchers to "go on looting expeditions to grab some subject matter or methodology from some outlying discipline and drag it back to mine or exploit or reprocess it" (Simon Penny quoted in Barry and Born 12-13). Aside from the outright hierarchicalisation of practice, this kind of interdisciplinarity represented, for Felix Guattari, little more than a form intellectual tourism; a safe place to visit for those who already have a strong methodological home. Disciplines in the subjective model are "indelibly stamped with the paradox of the between: subject to an institutional orthodoxization and normopathy that allows them to be valorized from an already established disciplinary perspective as exciting 'places' to visit and extend one's normal, core work" (Genosko 2).

I mentioned earlier that I felt I lacked a disciplinary centre, a home. Instead, what about a kind of vagrancy? A wandering through and between the scopes of disciplines, positioning them neither antagonistically nor in unison, but simply alongside one another in their singularity (Cecchetto, "Vagrant(ana)music" 1). Or treating them refractively, as lenses, by looking through one onto the transformed field of the other. Seeing, for example, cinema through the kaleidoscope of sonic discourse. Or treating them spatially but not topographically, "rat-drifting" through the margins and back alleys of one discipline, forming creative by-products from a preoccupation with the activities of another (Arnold). My intention is not to unify or to bridge these disciplines in my life--computation, music, and cinema--but to place them adjacent to one another and to negotiate and produce their intersections, dead-ends, and distances as such. This is akin, perhaps, to McKenzie Wark's method of antipodality, "which begins from the experience of being neither here nor there. It's about drifting along a moving and variable line, and of thinking and writing from within that experience" (_Telesthesia_ 10).

Both Wark's antipodality and Martin Arnold's rat-drifting draw from the Situationists and their method of the _dérive_, "a technique of rapid passage through varied ambiances... [involving] playful-constructive behavior and awareness of psychogeographical effects" (Debord). I suggest, then, that like cities, disciplines "have psychogeographical contours, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes that strongly discourage entry into or exit from certain zones" and which must be explored and experienced with both "this letting-go and its necessary contradiction... the dominance of psychogeographical variations by knowledge and calculation" (Debord).

Methodologically, what is key for me to the dérive is its movement, both with and against the gravity of place and action. Rather than spatializing my practice and placing it at a fixed position amongst disciplines in a kind of methodological Venn diagram, I am aiming for a _theory in motion_ that allows assemblages of localized, tactical, context-specific affinities and oppositions to emerge between disciplinary practices. Disciplinary adjacency thus serves as a decentring and a deflection of the temptation to synthesize or subjugate my activities in one discipline to those of another.

#### Practice-Based Research and Adjacency

The subjugation mode is clearly at play also in the increasingly-necessary construction of "practice-based research" in arts scholarship, in which this project ambivalently participates. According to proponents such as Graeme Sullivan, practice-based research asserts that a studio art practice can function as a form of scholarly research, and that "the studio experience is a form of intellectual and imaginative inquiry and is a site where research can be undertaken that is suf­ficiently robust to yield knowledge and understanding that is individually situated and socially and culturally relevant" (90). I do not entirely disagree, though there are fairly profound epistemological and artistic problems to be tangled with. The risk to art in this configuration is that it will always be subjugated to and justified by the regime of scholarly research, reduced, at worst, to a form of "empirical noodling."

In response to this risk, UK composer John Croft argues explicitly that art and music have no role or function as research. He invokes Heidegger's position that, though art undoubtedly possesses "cognitive content," this material resists conceptualization. Art, in contrast to research, "_presents_ rather than _represents_, _discloses_ without describing" (8). The problem with a critique like this, of course, is that it limits art's potentiality by boxing it into a generalized, universal, vaguely transcendental definition, rather than seeing it a variable and living field of context-specific contingencies and forces. Instead, the question we should ask is: How is research knowledge "yielded" by studio practice, and is there perhaps a more complex network of influence and modulation at play than Sullivan or Croft are willing to acknowledge?

One of the roles for disciplinary adjacency, in my mind, is to help prevent the subjugation of art by conventional research practices by highlighting, again, their operational closure. Art and research remain (potentially) distinct, yet still able to act as "lenses" that can transform and catalyze (but not necessarily cause) effects in each other<sup>4</sup> (Cecchetto, "Thoughts on Creative Practice and Research"). While any one of my videos are not, in themselves, research artifacts, the iterative and reflexive practice of making art (of being out in the world with my camera, or in the studio editing or programming) has powerful indirect influences via "systemic perturbation", helping me to cut new theoretical paths through conceptual thickets. "Any information value the perturbation takes on is constituted strictly by the distinctions belonging to the organization of the autopoietic machine itself" (Bryant 141). This means, I hope, that art and research can interact substantially with each other, without requiring them to be unified or linearly related, without having to share the same epistemic value system.

Art's role in a practice/research assemblage for me, then, is to modulate theorization with the weird, serendipitous, and distinctly material resonances of creative action. For example, in the process of exposing the "inner vision" of a computational algorithm as light and movement, such as in _In Passing_, my videos enabled me to theorize computation as a material and embodied force--as more than simply a representation of the world, but also as a body that affects other bodies _in_ the world.

#### Agonism and Antagonism

Barry and Born's third mode, the one that they find most potent, carries with it an appealing methodological politics, which they argue can produce "more radical shifts in knowledge practices, shifts that are epistemic and/or ontological" (13). I have already argued for adjacency and drift as personal metamethods that aim to produce a degree of ontological uncertainty when practising in multiple disciplines. And while I am sympathetic to the possibility of epistemic and methodological radicalism (particularly in the realm of design practice, which so often carries the weight of consumerist and industrial values in its formalisms), I prefer to focus here on local consequences for my particular practice-based assemblage of videos, sounds, and software.

It is important to note that, for me, working in multiple disciplines is not always straightforwardly generative, and my focus on certain long-reaching potentialities of software creativity often forecloses the experience of more immediately connections. Working in one discipline can often produce strange resonances and modulations, some of which amplify while others attenuate my work in the other disciplines. In particular, while my software development practice has the ability to elicit new kinds of creative or theoretical constructs by affording or limiting certain creative avenues, programming tends as often as not to disrupt and antagonize the work of making videos or new compositions.

Developing, as I do, bespoke video compositing and sound synthesis tools from scratch provides me with the irreplaceable ability to focus on particular medial qualities and constraints. Yet this is, as a practice, also immensely time-consuming and incalculably abstract. There is undoubtedly, in contrast to the often-invoked mainstream rhetoric of technological promise and potential, also a negative relation between technical and creative methods. Developing a new algorithmic image processing "lens" often eclipses my ability to see things "out in the world" with my camera. A push and pull inheres in my software art practice, where I often spend weeks working on a new piece of software, driven only by a creative hunch or curiosity, without any kind of perceptible feedback or result. These techno-aesthetic gambits, as often as not, fail to produce a compensating advantage; software's potential to serve as a creative catalyst, which is sometimes revelatory, can often seem to simply dissolve in programming's continual deferral of results in favour of the endless processing of abstractions. At these times, programming often feels like a creative obstruction, an unresolvable and prehistoric fumbling towards a tool's basic creative capacity that no artist in a traditional medium, painting or the piano, would be willing to accept.

It is in these moments of outright antagonism that something else emerges: a positive dimension to the conflict, which forces me to get away from the computer and out into the world with my camera, working in "real time" with quotidian material to produce simple videos with few edits or technical conceits. Many of the videos in _Insignificant Surfaces_ were produced as a result of this failure of the programming/video dialectic to synthesize. These videos emerged as the surplus of the disciplinary relation, the "unmarked space" of a programming practice that nonetheless perturbs and irritates the material system of my video art practice into producing something different. If computation is a recurring theoretical concern throughout all my work, its absence is as notable as--and inseparable from--its presence.

## Methods in Practice

So far, I have discussed a theory of interdisciplinary practice and research. Building on this, I will elaborate on a pair of specific research/creation methods that play a significant role within my work. These methods are a blend of personal strategies that have emerged from the process of creating and theorizing video, sound, and software over the past several years, as well as adaptations of established art and design methods. In particular, I want to highlight two essential applied methods that have woven themselves into my creative, technical, and theoretical assemblage: _lensing_ and _open source collaboration_.

### Lensing

Methodologically, lensing is a mode of practice and theory that emphasizes transformational interactions amongst artworks and concepts. Literally, a lens is a tool for focussing, bending, magnifying, or distorting light by means of refraction. The nature and extent of this refraction is always influenced by the characteristics of the lens itself, its material and curvature. Lenses are never a fully transparent instrument, insofar as they always lend their own particular qualities to the images they transmit--or rather, mediate. More subtly, though, lenses are active in nature. They imply a perspective and a relationality; their effects change and shift based on distance, the space around them, and time spent with them. My emphasis here is on the verb form: "to lens" (with the corresponding gerund lensing), which is understood as a form of technologically mediated transformation between different states or ways of seeing. Lenses are, in this project, a technical, metaphorical, and conceptual apparatus.

I will elaborate on lensing as a creative practice in the next section. As a practice-based research method, however, lensing starts from Gillian Rose's assertion that arts-based research functions not within an empirical, positivist epistemology where "to know is to see," but in an interpretive mode where, "for studio-researchers, to _know is to see ... differently_" (quoted in Sullivan 85).

Lensing shares commonalities with Mieke Bal's concept of _framing_. In her book, _Travelling Concepts in the Humanities_, Bal emphasizes that framing is an active process of contextualization, interpretation, and analysis (135-6). In defiance of the noun form ("a frame"), framing's methodological action--with its emphasis on temporality, duration, and change--aims to call into question the boundaries and status of its object of study. "As a verb, [framing]... also predicates that object, not in the abstract void of theoretical reflection, but in time, space, aspect; it frames it. Thus, all by itself, even on the level of the word alone, 'framing' questions the object-status of the objects studied in the cultural disciplines. This questioning results in a repositioning of the object as alive" (137).

While lensing shares with framing the processual and temporal qualities of what I called earlier a "theory in motion," lensing is primarily phenomenological rather than interpretive in character. It is a method that aims to find ways to alter and transform of our modes of seeing, listening, and thinking via an engagement with the "material-discursive phenomena" that constitute bodies in the world--both human and non-human (Barad 822).

I have appropriated the concept of lensing from my software architectural research at the Inclusive Design Research Centre. There, lensing is a specific technical strategy that involves the creation of networks of "functionally reactive" relays which can adapt and transform software state in response to change within the system. Lenses are implemented in a manner that enables them to be altered or replaced at any time, including in the midst of actually using the software. The goal of lensing, as it is implemented in the _Fluid Infusion_ programming framework<sup>5</sup> is to provide a "living" means to connect together software bodies from different individuals and communities without requiring their interface to be homogenous. This technology aims to resolve the "ontological impossibility" of traditional computational modeling by allowing for the transformation of a program and its data alike. Conventional object-oriented programming typically demands the imposition of a single, absolute ontology and hierarchy of types throughout a system. Contingencies are anathema to technologists, who have been immerse in a culture of power, efficiency, and protection (Basman) (Wing 33-4). This, we argue, is a technological power grab that usually operates under the cover of "interoperability" and "standardization" and fails to accommodate the messy, contingent, and temporal quality of cultural, linguistic, and conceptual diversity in the real world.

### Open Source Collaboration

Every piece of "software art" in this project, along with the supporting technical frameworks, have been made using the methods of open source software development. Early ideas and theories emerged via discussions with a distributed community of designers, programmers, and artists who have formed around the Fluid Infusion and Flocking communities. Even this text itself, from my first tentative notes and initial annotated bibliography, was produced using open source strategies<sup>6</sup>.

* Define what open source methods are
* Ask the question, why do open source, especially when many of the artifacts are personal?--it's unlikely that people will want to fork or remix or reuse this thesis
* Stephen Voyce suggests the potential of an open source poetics: "While modifying a source text might involve deleting or excising, it can also involve extending, transforming, and sharing a given work... Such techniques release a portion of a text from its static, fixed position in a single work, enabling it to par-ticipate in a proliferation of potential texts amid continuously changing assemblages of authorial, intertextual, and communal networks."
* And yet he largely links transformation to appropriative tactics or those that "break down conventions of authorship" [my quote] (which are great, but not always what I do) rather to what we call "artifactual linkage" where a work is a Warkian vector-- A vector is more or less a "technological medium"--in principle, anyway, with our approach a given application or, here, artwork, has the potential to serve in some way as the medium for some second-order creativity: an artwork that becomes the medium for other artworks, not as quotation but as "transformation"
* One of the key reasons for producing my artworks (as opposed to just tools that are directly intended to be used and reused) using open source collaborative methods is to turn them into _vectors_--more than just artworks but the basis for new abstractions and potentialities (this of course requires a very different approach not aesthetically, as one might imagine, but technically--to the tools that support software creativity)


an approach to creating and distributing software and texts--including this document--in which artifacts are generated and refined in a transparent and community-oriented fashion and licensed in a manner that encourages reuse, modification, and extension.


Highlighted on Page 44: The hacking of  new vectors of information has indeed been the turning point in the emergence of  a broader awareness of  the creative production of abstraction.

Page 45: "Everywhere the desire to open the virtuality of  information, to share data as a gift, to appropriate the vector for expression"

Highlighted on Page 88: What calls for a creative applicationof  the  hack  is  the  production  of  new  vectors  along  whichthe  event  may  continue  to  unfold  after  its  initial  explosioninto social space, and avoid capture by representation.

Highlighted on Page 159-160: vectors for a collective becoming


## Notes

1. I use the term "design" here expansively to include technical activities such as software architecture and programming. This is in part due to disciplinary affiliations (or lack thereof), in that I do not identify with the fields of computer science or engineering, but more importantly motivated by a long-standing desire to place the emphasis of my technological work on creative and social concerns, not on computation as such

2. Adjacency is _weird_. Marc Couroux: "Psychedelic adjacencies are generated via the strategic imbrication of overtly incongruent but subliminally (genetically) congenial signals. Such formations are inevitably spawned within a colloidal dispersion in which perpetually recombinant surfaces enter into temporary electrical relationships with one another by virtue of haphazard temporal and spatial proximities." (_Gloassary for a Techno-Sonic Control Society_).

3. I pick up this theme of transformation, using the optical metaphor of "lensing," as a research method later in this section, and as an aesthetic strategy in the next section, _Lensing and Perception_.

4. Causation and catalysis are key concepts in the neocybernetic concept of "closure" as simultaneously open _and_ closed: "Autopoietic systems are _both_ environmentally open to energic exchange _and_ operationally closed to informatic transfer" (Clarke and Hanson 9). Put differently, systems are open to catalysis and energy exchange with their environment, but closed to direct causation. I will pick up this thread of information vs. energetics in a later section. David Cecchetto further elaborates a systems view of his own "practice-catalysed research" in his blog post, to which my thoughts here are greatly indebted. "The distinction between catalysis and causation is simply meant to suggest that... [creative works] activate a system (my thinking) that operates according to a logic that is distinct from their own" ("Thoughts on Creative Practice").

5. Fluid Infusion serves as one of the critical technical foundations upon which all of my technical activities in the project are based. Flocking and Aconite, the two primary software components of this thesis, are both built using the philosophy and framework of Infusion. It is described in further detail in (Basman), (Basman, Clark, Lewis) and (Clark and Tindale).

6. The full history of changes to this thesis over time can be seen in its "version control repository" hosted on Github: https://github.com/colinbdclark/mfa-thesis/commits/methods.

## In-Progress Area (Will be deleted)

Even in the more benign variation of a discipline acting in _service_ of another, there is a risk to my project. There is a rich history of techician/artist collaborations, notably in the 1960s, such asExperiments in Art and Technology (EAT), the collaborations between engineers and composers at Bell Labs, (Higgins and Kahn 10) and < the importance of my technical work as being influenced by aesthetic concerns, even while simultaneously maintaining a direct dimension of service to other artists and composers (via an open source community) >

* especially the particular problem of the "service mode" in regards to technical/artistic activities, where, as Barry and Born point out, a scientist or technology often adopts a service role for artists, or worse yet, the artistic qualities of a project being subordinated to the rhetoric of technical innovation that has become so prominent both in research and the design industry--I am vulnerable to both of these potential problems, as a technologist and artist


### Quotes

"the claim is that artistic research has the potential to change the way we see and think. The studio experience is a form of intellectual and imaginative inquiry and is a site where research can be undertaken that is suf­ficiently robust to yield knowledge and understanding that is individually situated and socially and culturally relevant" (90)

"Rather than seeing inquiry as a linear procedure or an enclosing process, research can also be interactive and reflexive whereby imaginative insight is constructed from a creative and critical practice" (Sullivan 82)

"the modernist, empirical aphorism, to know is to see, was flipped as a consequence of postmodernist thinking because the way we framed reality according to particular interpretive regimes meant that to know is to see, and more crucially for studio-researchers, to know is to see ... differently" (Sullivan 85)


a call to "drop their relations... and all their usual motives for movement and action, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there. Chance is a less important factor in this activity than one might think: from a dérive point of view cities have psychogeographical contours, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes that strongly discourage entry into or exit from certain zones."

From Keith: "A situationist-type derive (in an analogy I’m sure Wark would himself recognize), undertaken for its own revelatory pleasures, and which can in retrospect produce works which point to - but are not themselves - the derive, which as experience is not identical to any of its representations."


Guattari: "transversality belongs to the processual subject's engendering of an existential territory and self-transportation beyond it. The key concepts involved are: mobility (traversing domains, levels, dimensions, the ability to carry and be carried beyond); creativity (productivity, adventurousness, aspiration, laying down lines of flight); self-engendering (autoproduction, self-positing subjectivity), territories from which one can really take off into new universes of reference" (Genosko 68).

### Old Notes

Discussing framing as a method of curation, Bal highlights its verb nature in contrast to  theory in motion:

In my own practice, it is easier to argue for my software design activities as research, in that they raise and contend with specific issues of knowledge and practice in the design field, addressing questions about how to make creative technologies that are more social, more inclusive, and more actively "material" (i.e. simultaneously mutable and stable, a topic I will cover further the section on software bodies) than today's technologies are capable of. Yet, in a research culture that is increasingly technophilic and focused on the performance of originality...

The question, either way, is where the of scholar value is placed is dominant in the practice-based research model, and which one is subjugated? And when framed as research, what happens to art (and to research)?


Introducing a music synthesizer instrument into the video compositing signal, for example, produces not just a form of "visual music," but a distinctly media-appropriate effect.
