_In Passing_ (2015) is an eighteen-minute video consisting of three close-up shots of a dried-out leaf on the floor of my apartment. It is the kind of scene that would have been easy to miss: an old leaf had blown into the house on a windy summer day and became tangled in cobwebs in the corner, flickering aimlessly with the breeze. There is nothing particularly profound about the scene, no narrative or metaphorical schema motivating its capture on video. It was simply there, nearly but not quite lost amidst the quotidian activities and distractions of life at home.

Up close, the texture of the leaf is particularly visible--its ridges and curls, growths and cracks. Behind it, the linoleum tile floor is also thick with texture and grit. Over the course of the first shot, which is the longest of the three, the leaf's texture is amplified and granulated by digital processing. Eventually, it becomes apparent that the leaf is gradually disappearing, the algorithmic process eroding it away to reveal the floor beneath it. Leaf and linoleum, figure and ground, flatten and merge. The leaf eventually blows across the floor to the other side of the frame. Just before its outline fades from view completely, it is swept out of the frame by a sudden gust of wind. After several moments spent in its absence, there is a cut. The leaf returns, seen from another angle. We hear a crackling sound, analogous in quality and rhythm to the leaf's granulation in the previous scene. In this case, though, the digital intervention (the sound) is additive, rather than subtractive. The leaf remains intact. In the final scene, the leaf is once again seen from a different angle. Silent once more, the visual erosion has returned. This time it is apparent that the digital processing is eating away at the entire scene, not only the leaf. More quickly than before, the leaf again fades to nearly nothing and then is caught by the wind and blown out of the frame. The video ends.

This description of _In Passing_ highlights several aspects that are relevant to a discussion of its particular embodied technics. First, it is a long, slow, and arguably repetitive video. There is no story to escape into, no self-effacing narrative or expressionistic flow. It takes time and demands attention. Secondly, the video draws together several forces: the natural energy of the wind and the leaf's haptics on one hand, and the technological mediation of the camera’s framing and editing along with the modulatory capacity of the digital signal processing algorithm on the other. Once coupled to the embodied perception of the viewer, _In Passing_ forms a kind of system in which natural, technical, and bodily energies co-mingle over time. It is an aggregator and modulator of these forces. In this system, the camera serves as a means to amplify the small energies of everyday life, while the processing shifts and expands them. The viewer activates the system, transforming these energies with their eyes, ears, and bodies.

_In Passing_ suggests that a work of art can function differently, perhaps, than one might traditionally expect; as more than just a static object for aesthetic contemplation. As with Jack Chambers' embodied technics of perceptual realism, it is a system to see (and hear) with, a means to generate and transform experience.

"Perceptual realism incorporates two systems of technology (historic and industrial) and two systems of visibility (body and mind) to structure a reflector-object of experience... two inter-working processes motivate and advance one another intentionally to create this transmitter unit... The closure of these two extending systems... creates its own object. It is an object to see with, rather than a thing just to see" (Chambers 41-2).

While Chambers uses the term "object" here, he is nonetheless suggesting that the work of art can serve as catalyst for an ongoing process of perceptual transformation within everyday experience. In a suitably dark room and with sufficient attention, the continuously shifting, stochastic sparkles of _In Passing_'s digital processing have a way of entering into a viewer's persistent vision, activating a mode of seeing that continues beyond the video's duration. Sparkles can be seen (and imagined) in anything, even with eyes closed. This model shifts the art, by means of an engaged and embodied viewer, beyond the temporal and spatial frame of the video and out into the world. It thus functions as a medial extension of our seeing and hearing, a sort of perceptual synthesizer (perhaps this what Chambers mean by a "transmitter unit?") that modulates the carrier wave of perception with the work's own oscillations. A system of creative, reciprocal, and active seeing that continues to operate in the world. "My eye, then, inspiralling, frictioning style-wise, being instrument for striking sparks, is bequeathed visions at every illumination... Similar vistas being available to any viewer willing to release his eye for comparable movement" (Brakhage 26).

Arguably, _In Passing_'s eighteen-minute timespan is only marginally sufficient (if at all) to activate such a "system to see with." Nonetheless, its duration, coupled to its highly reduced visual vocabulary, slow pace, absence of narrative, and preponderance of silence, has the tendency to mark or make prominent our embodiment. Even as seated and relatively still cinema-goers, we notice our bodies.
With the absence of sound and story, the experience of time in _In Passing_ is concentrated into a curious form of waiting. It suggests a modality of time that, as Howard Schweizer describes it, "must be endured rather than mastered, felt rather than thought" (23). Our usual conception of waiting is, of course, highly bound up with associations of discomfort, frustration, lack of attention, and of temporariness--a passing through, rather than lingering. But while waiting certainly fails, it does so radically. It fails to achieve, to direct, to participate in the capitalistic drive of accomplishment, success, and productivity (8). It opens time up. This form of waiting foregrounds our bodies, allows us to experience duration creatively and aimlessly, rather than instrumentally. It is not about "how we pass through waiting, but how we are in it... the quality of waiting as such" (11). In Passing manipulates its temporality, transforming this particular moment in time by stretching it and folding it onto itself in layers; the leaf’s presence and absence occurs simultaneously. We experience time’s transience and can occupy its passing, carrying something of it away with us.

This ambivalence of waiting, of time alternatingly passing by in distraction and thickening with attention, forces us to contend with our bodies in the present moment, whether shifting in our seats or hearing our own breathing. Boring or not, we are in it, and aware of it. This waiting is also a reminder of our own passing. Our time is coextensive with that of the leaf. "The body that endures... is always also a reminder of its mortality" (17).

While _In Passing_’s "system to see with" is outwardly transformational, capable of changing a viewer’s sense of time and perceptual energies, it also operates its own internal mode of transformation at a technical level. The image processing algorithm that causes the leaf to slowly erode is driven by two time-varying values: the threshold, which specifies the degree to which the leaf should be consumed by its background, and the noise seed, a value that influences the random sparkle pattern and its rate of change. These parameters are generated by a digital synthesizer, a software component ordinarily intended to generate sounds, which has been repurposed to modulate the parameters of the visual transformation of the leaf. In the second section of _In Passing_, the crackling sound is produced by connecting this synthesizer directly to the speakers instead of to the visual effect. Here, the synthesizer acts as a flexible "translation mediator,"" to use Don Ihde’s terminology (112), mapping the sonic to the visual and back again.

Yet there is something troubling to me about Ihde's idea of translation, at least when thinking about how _In Passing_ operates. The idea of translation is predicated upon an informational model of the digital (an admittedly very dominant model at the heart of the system, as illustrated by the definitional term "information technology"), rather than one of energetics, signals, and flows. Ihde's translational mediation is based on an abstraction of data from a representation. "To become available the information, data, or image must be transformed, translated, into what is open to our anthropological constant, an embodied human" (113). The power of Ihde's model is that it positions embodiment centrally within the realm of the digital, but it also carries with it a sedimented transmission model of communication, positioning data "above" the representation as a (relatively) stable referent or message preserved within a linguistic system of translation.

Indeed, _In Passing_’s repurposable synthesizer algorithm can be interpreted informationally as proof of data's translatability across representations. However, Bruno Latour offers an alternative concept of transformation, one that rejects the idea of data as raw material. He argues that there is no such thing as information, "there is only transformation. Information as something which will be carried through space and time, without deformation, is a complete myth" (Lovink and Shultz).

Instead, he proposes a model in which representations participate in an aligned network of transformations—"immutable mobiles" that represent the "constants carried intact through the transformation of the media" (Latour 425). Data is no longer static, objective, and at a distance from representation, yet meaning can still emerge from the alignment of constants across a series of transformations. "What is kept constant from one representation to the next is morphed, quite naturally, into the thing itself" (427). However, the challenge of Latour’s model is that it is profoundly difficult, in practice, to identify and register these constants across transformations. This is, in part, the creative gambit of _In Passing_, the activity embedded in its perception--to recognize and extend this network of transformations. _In Passing_'s immutable mobiles, left open for viewer engagement, are the pulsations and vibrations of its various energies--its rhythm, pacing, and durational unfolding--while its algorithms act as modulators of this energy as it is passed back and forth between visual and sonic mediators. Here, there is no information, only energy, duration, and embodiment.
